Mentors
=======

.. contents::
    :depth: 2

"Code mentor" is the friendly name we use instead of "examiner".

What?
-----

The primary role of the code mentor is to assess candidates by providing
structured, supportive, positively framed yet honest and actionable feedback
and critique on projects and pair programming tasks presented as part of the
grading process.

Code mentors are paid for their time in fulfilling this role. Candidates pay to
take a grade, part of which goes to the mentor with the rest going to
CodeGrades for two purposes: to pay for running CodeGrades and as a pool of
money to support FLOSS projects, communities and infrastructure.

Code mentors may also be involved in fostering learning and study
groups in the wider community and will also be an invited to take part in
writing / revising the CodeGrades syllabus. Again, CodeGrades will financially
support such endeavours (under the "supporting FLOSS" banner).

To be very clear, in addition to the educational aims of CodeGrades, another
important aim is to become financially sustainable to be able to support and
grow FLOSS projects.

Who?
----

Code mentors are professional software developers with current industry
knowledge and who demonstrate technical expertise, pedagogical skill and
supportive professionalism (the core skills needed to fulfil the role of an
effective code mentor). CodeGrades will favour developers who actively
contribute to free / open source projects.

Becoming a code mentor should be viewed as a special achievement, something to
put on a CV and which folks may aspire to as a career aim.

Furthermore, should the CodeGrades experiment succeed, becoming a code mentor
also means joining a professional support network of other folks who share a
similar desire for personal development through supporting others in learning
to write code.

How?
----

Since CodeGrades is bootstrapping, becoming a CodeMentor will initially be
an ad hoc "invite" based system which will include some provision of training
concerning the processes, assessment criteria and expectations involved in
taking part in a grading as a code mentor.

Eventually, becoming a code mentor will be a well trodden path, encompassing 
carefully planned training based upon experience and reflections gained during
the bootstrapping phase. However, this is a long way off.

Ultimately, we imagine four levels of code mentor:

* Apprentice mentor (someone learning to become a code mentor).
* Code mentor (fulfilling and being paid for participation in grading described
  above).
* Tenured mentor (the same as a code mentor, but employed full-time by
  CodeGrades and entailing further duties as part of their role as an employee
  of CodeGrades -- if the experiment ever gets that far).
* Distinguished mentor (a mentor recognised with such a title by their fellow
  code mentors as a mark of respect for their efforts, support or
  contributions).

We want to foster a positive community that recognises and cherishes the
achievements of others - and having non-hierarchical levels (defined in terms
of *personal investment in the role of code mentor*) is one such mechanism.

Why?
----

Code mentors fulfil three needs:

* They are trusted role models for beginner programmers. In this sense a code
  mentor is promoting a certain programming culture and expectations of
  behaviour.
* By taking and achieving a grade a candidate is going through an initiation
  into the "next level". The code mentor is the "wise elder" figure whose word
  makes this happen. This is primarily to help address impostor syndrome: there
  is evidence that an expert thinks you (the candidate) have attained the
  skills and knowledge for "grade 5 Python" (for example). The validation comes
  from a respected source of authority external to the candidate.
* A code mentor applies their considerable technical skill and knowledge in
  such a way to give meaningful feedback, constructive critique and actionable
  suggestions relating to the evidence of attainment of candidates at different
  levels of grading. The marking scheme allows mentors to indicate where
  strengths and weaknesses may be for various attributes of coding attainment,
  and also includes sections for *guided written feedback* so mentors express
  specific feedback, support and advice relating to the individual candidate.

It may also be helpful to explicitly state that the grading assessment is NOT
a case of "I've reached level 42 in the Numberwang scale". Like a GPA or SAT
score, this is meaningless, arbitrary and culturally toxic (the focus becomes
the level, rather than what it takes to achieve such a level).
